\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename johnson.info
@settitle johnson: multi-format dictionary UI for Emacs
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Johnson: (johnson).   Multi-format dictionary UI for Emacs.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@author Pablo Stafforini (@email{pablo@@stafforini.com})
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top johnson: multi-format dictionary UI for Emacs

@samp{johnson} is a multi-format dictionary UI for Emacs.  It @*
provides the functionality of programs such as GoldenDict and StarDict, @*
allowing you to look up words across multiple dictionaries simultaneously @*
and view formatted definitions in a dedicated Emacs buffer. @*

The package is implemented entirely in Emacs Lisp with no external @*
dependencies, relying on Emacs 30.1's built-in sqlite support for @*
efficient headword indexing.  Dictionary files are parsed natively, @*
without calling external tools. @*

In version 0.1, the package supports the DSL (ABBYY Lingvo) format via @*
the @samp{johnson-dsl.el} backend module.  Future versions will add support @*
for StarDict, MDict, and BGL (Babylon) formats. @*

The architecture is modular and consists of three files.  The core module @*
(@samp{johnson.el}) provides the lookup engine, results buffer, navigation, @*
history, and a plist-based format registry @*
(@ref{Format registration}).  The sqlite index management @*
is delegated to @samp{johnson-db.el}, which maintains one database per @*
dictionary file in a configurable cache directory @*
(@ref{Cache directory}).  Each dictionary format is handled @*
by a separate backend module—currently =johnson-dsl.el=—that registers @*
itself with the core via the format registry. @*

A typical workflow consists of three steps.  First, configure @*
@code{johnson-dictionary-directories} to point at your dictionary files @*
(@ref{Dictionary discovery}).  Second, run @samp{M-x johnson-index} to scan @*
and index all discovered dictionaries (@ref{Indexing dictionaries}). @*
Third, use @samp{M-x johnson-lookup} to look up words with dynamic @*
completion (@ref{Looking up words}). @*

Results are displayed in a @samp{*johnson*} buffer using @code{johnson-mode}, a @*
read-only major mode derived from @code{special-mode}.  Each dictionary that @*
contains a match for the queried word gets its own collapsible section, @*
displayed in priority order (@ref{Display ordering}).  The buffer @*
supports Info-like navigation: press @samp{n} and @samp{p} to move between @*
sections, @samp{TAB} to collapse or expand a section, @samp{RET} to follow @*
cross-references, and @samp{l} and @samp{r} to navigate back and forward through @*
lookup history. @*

Dictionaries are organized into groups by language pair (e.g., ``English @*
@arrow{} Spanish'').  Groups are auto-detected from dictionary metadata but can @*
be customized via @code{johnson-dictionary-groups} @*
(@ref{Search scope and groups}). @*

The package also provides a dictionary list buffer via @samp{M-x
johnson-list-dictionaries}, showing all discovered dictionaries with @*
their indexing status and entry counts @*
(@ref{Dictionary list}). @*

@end ifnottex

@menu
* User options::
* Commands::
* Functions::
* Faces::
* Indices::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

User options

* Dictionary discovery::
* Search scope and groups::
* Display ordering::
* Lookup history::
* Cache directory::

Commands

* Looking up words::
* Indexing dictionaries::
* Managing groups and scope::
* Navigating the results buffer::
* Following cross-references::
* Navigation history::
* Copying entries::
* Dictionary list::
* Cache management::

Functions

* Format registration::
* Completion at point::
* Database lifecycle::
* Metadata storage::
* Headword normalization::
* Entry insertion::
* Querying entries::
* Staleness detection and reset::
* DSL format detection::
* DSL metadata parsing::
* DSL index building::
* DSL entry retrieval::
* DSL entry rendering::

Faces

* Text styling faces::
* Content type faces::
* Link faces::
* Section header face::
* Color faces::

Indices

* Function index::
* Variable index::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node User options
@chapter User options

@menu
* Dictionary discovery::
* Search scope and groups::
* Display ordering::
* Lookup history::
* Cache directory::
@end menu

@node Dictionary discovery
@section Dictionary discovery

@vindex johnson-dictionary-directories
The user option @code{johnson-dictionary-directories} specifies the @*
directories to scan recursively for dictionary files.  When the package @*
discovers dictionaries, it walks each directory in this list and @*
identifies files using the registered format backends' detection @*
functions.  Files matching the @samp{_abrv} naming convention (abbreviation @*
tables) are automatically skipped. @*

The default value is @samp{("~/.local/share/dictionaries/")}.  You should @*
change this to point at wherever your dictionary files are stored.  The @*
value is a list of directory paths (type: @code{(repeat directory)}), so you @*
can specify multiple directories if your dictionaries are spread across @*
different locations. @*

@node Search scope and groups
@section Search scope and groups

@vindex johnson-default-search-scope
@vindex johnson-dictionary-groups
The user option @code{johnson-default-search-scope} controls the default @*
search scope for lookups.  When set to @code{all} (the default), lookups @*
search across all discovered dictionaries.  When set to @code{group}, lookups @*
search only within the currently active dictionary group.  The type is @*
@code{(choice (const all) (const group))}. @*

You can switch between these modes interactively via @*
@code{johnson-select-group} (@ref{Managing groups and scope}), which @*
also lets you choose the active group. @*

The user option @code{johnson-dictionary-groups} provides user-defined @*
dictionary group overrides.  It is an alist of @samp{(GROUP-NAME .
(LIST-OF-DICTIONARY-NAMES))} (type: @code{(alist :key-type string :value-type
(repeat string))}). @*

When this option is @code{nil} (the default), groups are auto-detected from @*
dictionary metadata.  Each dictionary is assigned to a group based on @*
its source and target language pair, formatted as @samp{"Source \to Target"} @*
(e.g., @samp{"English \to Spanish"}). @*

Set this option when you want to create custom groupings that differ from @*
the language-pair default.  For instance, you could create a group named @*
@samp{"Medical"} that includes specialized medical dictionaries across @*
different language pairs. @*

@node Display ordering
@section Display ordering

@vindex johnson-dictionary-priorities
The user option @code{johnson-dictionary-priorities} controls the display @*
order of dictionary sections in the results buffer.  It is an alist of @*
@samp{(DICTIONARY-NAME . PRIORITY)} where PRIORITY is an integer (type: @*
@code{(alist :key-type string :value-type integer)}). @*

Lower numbers display first.  The default priority is 0, so dictionaries @*
without an explicit priority entry are all treated equally and appear in @*
discovery order. @*

You would set this option to ensure that your preferred dictionaries @*
always appear at the top of the results.  For example, to make the @*
``Oxford English-Spanish'' dictionary appear before all others, assign it a @*
negative priority: @*

@lisp
(setq johnson-dictionary-priorities
      '(("Oxford English-Spanish" . -10)
        ("Collins English-Spanish" . -5)))
@end lisp

@node Lookup history
@section Lookup history

@vindex johnson-history-max
@vindex johnson-history
The user option @code{johnson-history-max} sets the maximum number of entries @*
retained in the lookup history.  The default value is @code{100} (type: @*
@code{integer}). @*

The variable @code{johnson-history} stores the list of previously looked-up @*
words and serves as the history list for @code{completing-read} in @*
@code{johnson-lookup} (@ref{Looking up words}).  You can access @*
previous lookups via @samp{M-p} and @samp{M-n} in the completion prompt.  If @*
@code{savehist-mode} is active, this history persists across Emacs sessions. @*

When the history exceeds @code{johnson-history-max} entries, the oldest @*
entries are discarded. @*

@node Cache directory
@section Cache directory

@vindex johnson-cache-directory
The user option @code{johnson-cache-directory} specifies the directory where @*
sqlite index files are stored.  Each dictionary gets its own sqlite @*
database file in this directory, named by the MD5 hash of the dictionary @*
file's absolute path.  This hashing scheme prevents collisions when @*
multiple dictionaries share similar names or reside in different @*
directories. @*

The default value is @samp{~/.cache/johnson/}.  You may want to change this @*
if you prefer to store caches on a faster drive, in a location that is @*
excluded from backups, or alongside other application caches.  The value @*
must be a directory path (type: @code{directory}). @*

The directory is created automatically if it does not exist when a @*
database is first opened via @code{johnson-db-open} @*
(@ref{Database lifecycle}). @*

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@menu
* Looking up words::
* Indexing dictionaries::
* Managing groups and scope::
* Navigating the results buffer::
* Following cross-references::
* Navigation history::
* Copying entries::
* Dictionary list::
* Cache management::
@end menu

@node Looking up words
@section Looking up words

@findex johnson-lookup
@findex johnson-new-search
@findex johnson-refresh
The command @code{johnson-lookup} is the primary entry point for dictionary @*
lookups.  When called interactively, it prompts for a word with @*
@code{completing-read}, defaulting to the word at point.  The completion @*
table is backed by sqlite prefix queries across all in-scope @*
dictionaries, providing dynamic suggestions as you type.  Each candidate @*
is annotated with the number of dictionaries containing it when there @*
are multiple matches (e.g., @samp{(3 dicts)}). @*

If the dictionaries have not been indexed yet, @code{johnson-lookup} prompts @*
you to index them first.  When indexing is already in progress, the @*
lookup is deferred and will resume automatically once indexing completes. @*

After a word is selected, the command queries all dictionaries for exact @*
matches (case-insensitive, accent-insensitive via @*
@code{johnson-db-normalize}; see @ref{Headword normalization}) @*
and displays the results in the @samp{*johnson*} buffer.  The word is pushed @*
onto the lookup history (@ref{Lookup history}) and the @*
navigation history (@ref{Navigation history}). @*

The optional WORD argument allows calling @code{johnson-lookup} from Lisp @*
code without prompting. @*

The command @code{johnson-new-search} re-invokes @code{johnson-lookup} without @*
arguments, prompting for a new word.  It is bound to @samp{s} in @*
@code{johnson-mode} for quick access when you want to search for a different @*
word while viewing results. @*

The command @code{johnson-refresh} re-displays the current word by @*
re-querying all dictionaries and rebuilding the results buffer.  This is @*
useful if you have re-indexed a dictionary and want to see updated @*
results.  It is bound to @samp{g} in @code{johnson-mode}.  Unlike a new search, @*
refreshing does not push a new entry onto the navigation history. @*

@node Indexing dictionaries
@section Indexing dictionaries

@findex johnson-index
@findex johnson-stop-indexing
The command @code{johnson-index} scans all configured dictionary directories, @*
discovers dictionary files, and indexes (or re-indexes) those whose @*
index is stale or missing.  Staleness is determined by comparing the @*
file modification time stored in the database against the actual file's @*
modification time (@ref{Staleness detection and reset}). @*

Progress is displayed in a dedicated @samp{*johnson-indexing*} buffer, @*
showing one line per dictionary with its name, progress counter, and @*
result (entry count or error message). @*

When called interactively, indexing runs asynchronously using @*
timer-based cooperative multitasking, so Emacs remains responsive during @*
the process.  In batch or noninteractive mode, indexing runs @*
synchronously.  If indexing is already in progress, the command signals @*
an error rather than starting a second concurrent run. @*

The optional CALLBACK argument accepts a function to be called with no @*
arguments once indexing completes.  This is used internally to chain @*
lookup after indexing, but you can also use it in your own scripts. @*

Dictionaries that are already up to date are skipped with an ``up to @*
date'' message rather than being re-indexed. @*

The command @code{johnson-stop-indexing} cancels the current asynchronous @*
indexing run.  It cancels the timer, clears the indexing queue, and @*
reports how many dictionaries were processed before stopping.  This is @*
useful if indexing is taking too long or if you want to abort and fix a @*
problem before continuing. @*

@node Managing groups and scope
@section Managing groups and scope

@findex johnson-select-group
The command @code{johnson-select-group} lets you choose the active dictionary @*
group.  It presents a @code{completing-read} prompt with all available groups @*
plus an @samp{"All"} pseudo-group. @*

Selecting @samp{"All"} sets the search scope to @code{all}, meaning lookups will @*
search across every discovered dictionary.  Selecting a specific group @*
sets the scope to @code{group} and activates that group, restricting lookups @*
to dictionaries within it. @*

The available groups depend on your configuration.  If @*
@code{johnson-dictionary-groups} is @code{nil} (the default), groups are @*
auto-detected from dictionary metadata as language pairs @*
(@ref{Search scope and groups}).  If you have defined @*
custom groups, those are used instead. @*

@node Navigating the results buffer
@section Navigating the results buffer

@findex johnson-next-section
@findex johnson-prev-section
@findex johnson-prev-section-header
@findex johnson-toggle-section
The command @code{johnson-next-section} moves point to the next dictionary @*
section header in the results buffer.  If point is already on a header, @*
it moves past it to find the next one.  When there are no more sections @*
below, it displays ``No more sections''.  It is bound to @samp{n} in @*
@code{johnson-mode}. @*

The command @code{johnson-prev-section} moves point to the previous @*
dictionary section header.  When there is no previous section, it @*
displays ``No previous section''.  It is bound to @samp{p} in @code{johnson-mode}. @*

The command @code{johnson-prev-section-header} is an alias for @*
@code{johnson-prev-section}, bound to @samp{S-TAB} (@samp{<backtab>}) in @*
@code{johnson-mode}. @*

The command @code{johnson-toggle-section} collapses or expands the dictionary @*
section at point.  Collapsed sections hide their content using an @*
overlay with the @code{invisible} property and display a @samp{[+]} indicator. @*
Expanding the section removes the overlay, revealing the full entry @*
content.  The command works whether point is on the section header or @*
within the section body.  It is bound to @samp{TAB} in @code{johnson-mode}. @*

@node Following cross-references
@section Following cross-references

@findex johnson-follow-ref
The command @code{johnson-follow-ref} activates the cross-reference button at @*
point.  In DSL dictionaries, cross-references are created by @samp{[ref]} tags @*
or @samp{<<...>>} markers and rendered as clickable text buttons.  Activating @*
a cross-reference button triggers a new @code{johnson-lookup} for the @*
referenced word, searching across all loaded dictionaries regardless of @*
the current scope setting. @*

If there is no button at point, the command displays ``No cross-reference @*
at point''.  It is bound to @samp{RET} in @code{johnson-mode}. @*

@node Navigation history
@section Navigation history

@findex johnson-history-back
@findex johnson-history-forward
The results buffer maintains a buffer-local navigation history, similar @*
to the history in Info mode or eww.  Each lookup pushes the word onto @*
the history list.  Following a cross-reference also creates a history @*
entry. @*

The command @code{johnson-history-back} navigates to the previous word in the @*
history, re-executing the lookup for that word.  When at the beginning @*
of the history, it displays ``Beginning of history''.  It is bound to @samp{l} @*
in @code{johnson-mode}. @*

The command @code{johnson-history-forward} navigates to the next word in the @*
history (after going back).  When at the end of the history, it displays @*
``End of history''.  It is bound to @samp{r} in @code{johnson-mode}. @*

Navigation history is separate from the lookup history stored in @*
@code{johnson-history} (@ref{Lookup history}).  The lookup history @*
is a global list used for @code{completing-read} recall (@samp{M-p=/=M-n}), while @*
the navigation history is buffer-local to the @samp{*johnson*} buffer and @*
tracks the sequence of words viewed in that buffer. @*

When navigating back or forward, the lookup is performed with history @*
push suppressed (via the internal @code{johnson--navigating-history} flag), @*
preventing duplicate entries from cluttering the history. @*

@node Copying entries
@section Copying entries

@findex johnson-copy-entry
The command @code{johnson-copy-entry} copies the current dictionary section's @*
entry as plain text to the kill ring.  All text properties, faces, and @*
markup are stripped; only the raw text content is copied. @*

The ``current section'' is determined by point position: whichever @*
dictionary section the cursor is inside.  Section boundaries are @*
identified by the section content overlays.  If point is not within any @*
section (e.g., between sections or on a header line), the command @*
displays ``No section at point''. @*

It is bound to @samp{w} in @code{johnson-mode}. @*

@node Dictionary list
@section Dictionary list

@findex johnson-list-dictionaries
@findex johnson-dict-list-reindex
@findex johnson-dict-list-show-details
The command @code{johnson-list-dictionaries} opens a @samp{*johnson-dictionaries*} @*
buffer displaying all discovered dictionaries in a tabulated list.  The @*
buffer uses @code{johnson-dict-list-mode}, a major mode derived from @*
@code{tabulated-list-mode}. @*

The table shows six columns: Name (the dictionary's display name), @*
Format (e.g., ``DSL''), Languages (the source-to-target language pair), @*
Entries (the number of indexed headwords), Status (``Indexed'', ``Needs @*
reindex'', or ``Not indexed''), and Path (the abbreviated file path).  The @*
list is sorted by name by default and can be re-sorted by clicking on @*
column headers. @*

The command @code{johnson-dict-list-reindex} re-indexes the dictionary at @*
point in the tabulated list.  It deletes the existing index file, forces @*
a fresh index build, and refreshes the list to show the updated entry @*
count and status.  It is bound to @samp{i} in @code{johnson-dict-list-mode}. @*

The command @code{johnson-dict-list-show-details} opens a @*
@samp{*johnson-dict-details*} buffer showing detailed information about the @*
dictionary at point: its name, format, source and target languages, @*
group, priority, file path, index path, entry count, and whether the @*
index is stale.  It is bound to @samp{RET} in @code{johnson-dict-list-mode}. @*

@node Cache management
@section Cache management

@findex johnson-close-caches
The command @code{johnson-close-caches} kills all dictionary file cache @*
buffers and closes all open sqlite database connections.  It also resets @*
the internal dictionary list and indexed state, so the next lookup will @*
trigger a fresh discovery and staleness check. @*

This is useful if you have added or removed dictionary files and want to @*
force a clean rediscovery, or if you want to reclaim the memory used by @*
cached dictionary buffers. @*

The command reports how many cache buffers were closed and confirms that @*
all database connections were closed. @*

@node Functions
@chapter Functions

@menu
* Format registration::
* Completion at point::
* Database lifecycle::
* Metadata storage::
* Headword normalization::
* Entry insertion::
* Querying entries::
* Staleness detection and reset::
* DSL format detection::
* DSL metadata parsing::
* DSL index building::
* DSL entry retrieval::
* DSL entry rendering::
@end menu

@node Format registration
@section Format registration

@findex johnson-register-format
The function @code{johnson-register-format} registers a dictionary format @*
backend with the core.  It accepts a plist with the following keys: @*

@itemize
@item
@code{:name} --- a unique string identifying the format (e.g., @samp{"dsl"}). @*
@item
@code{:extensions} --- a list of file extension strings used to filter files @*
during directory scanning (e.g., @samp{("dsl")}). @*
@item
@code{:detect} --- a function @samp{(PATH) \to BOOLEAN} that determines whether @*
a file at PATH is a dictionary in this format. @*
@item
@code{:parse-metadata} --- a function @samp{(PATH) \to PLIST} that extracts @*
metadata from the dictionary file, returning at minimum @code{:name}, @*
@code{:source-lang}, and @code{:target-lang}. @*
@item
@code{:build-index} --- a function @samp{(PATH CALLBACK) \to NIL} that parses @*
the dictionary and calls @samp{(funcall CALLBACK HEADWORD OFFSET LENGTH)} @*
for each entry. @*
@item
@code{:retrieve-entry} --- a function @samp{(PATH OFFSET LENGTH) \to STRING} @*
that retrieves the raw entry text at the given location. @*
@item
@code{:render-entry} --- a function @samp{(RAW-TEXT) \to NIL} that inserts @*
rendered content into the current buffer at point. @*
@end itemize

If a format with the same @code{:name} is already registered, it is replaced. @*
This allows format backends to re-register themselves (e.g., after @*
reloading the file during development). @*

Backend modules typically call this function inside a @*
@code{with-eval-after-load} form for @samp{johnson}, ensuring the core is loaded @*
before registration occurs.  For an example, see how @samp{johnson-dsl.el} @*
registers the DSL format at the end of the file. @*

@node Completion at point
@section Completion at point

@findex johnson-completion-at-point-function
The function @code{johnson-completion-at-point-function} provides a @*
completion-at-point (CAPF) backend backed by the johnson dictionary @*
index.  It completes the word at point using the same dynamic sqlite @*
prefix queries as @code{johnson-lookup} (@ref{Looking up words}). @*

To use this function, add it to @code{completion-at-point-functions} in the @*
major modes where you want dictionary completion: @*

@lisp
(add-hook 'text-mode-hook
          (lambda ()
            (add-to-list 'completion-at-point-functions
                         #'johnson-completion-at-point-function)))
@end lisp

The completion respects the current search scope: if the scope is set to @*
@code{group}, only dictionaries in the active group are queried. @*

@node Database lifecycle
@section Database lifecycle

@findex johnson-db-open
@findex johnson-db-close
The function @code{johnson-db-open} opens or creates the sqlite database for @*
a given dictionary file path.  It ensures the cache directory @*
(@ref{Cache directory}) exists, creates the @code{metadata} and @*
@code{entries} tables if they do not already exist, creates the index on @*
@code{headword_normalized} if absent, and returns the database connection @*
object.  This is the primary entry point for obtaining a database handle. @*

The function @code{johnson-db-close} closes a sqlite database connection. @*
Pass the connection object previously returned by @code{johnson-db-open}. @*
In practice, the core module caches database connections in a hash table @*
and closes them all at once via @code{johnson-close-caches} @*
(@ref{Cache management}). @*

@node Metadata storage
@section Metadata storage

@findex johnson-db-set-metadata
@findex johnson-db-get-metadata
@findex johnson-db-get-all-metadata
The metadata table stores key-value pairs describing each dictionary: @*
its name, format identifier, source and target languages, source file @*
path, file modification time, and entry count.  These metadata entries @*
are written during indexing and read during dictionary discovery and @*
staleness detection (@ref{Staleness detection and reset}). @*

The function @code{johnson-db-set-metadata} writes a key-value pair to the @*
metadata table using @samp{INSERT OR REPLACE} semantics, so existing keys are @*
updated rather than duplicated.  Both KEY and VALUE are strings. @*

The function @code{johnson-db-get-metadata} retrieves a single metadata value @*
by key, returning @code{nil} if the key is not present in the database. @*

The function @code{johnson-db-get-all-metadata} returns all metadata as an @*
alist of @samp{(KEY . VALUE)} pairs.  This is useful for displaying @*
comprehensive dictionary details, such as in the dictionary detail @*
buffer opened by @code{johnson-dict-list-show-details} @*
(@ref{Dictionary list}). @*

@node Headword normalization
@section Headword normalization

@findex johnson-db-normalize
The function @code{johnson-db-normalize} transforms a string for @*
case-insensitive and accent-insensitive search.  It performs three steps @*
in sequence: NFKD decomposition via @code{ucs-normalize-NFKD-string}, @*
removal of combining diacritical marks (Unicode general category Mn), @*
and downcasing via @code{downcase}. @*

This normalization means that searching for @samp{cafe} will match headwords @*
such as @samp{café}, @samp{CAFÉ}, and @samp{Café}.  Both user input and headwords are @*
normalized with this function before storage and querying, ensuring @*
consistent matching behavior. @*

If the input is @code{nil} or an empty string, the function returns an empty @*
string. @*

@node Entry insertion
@section Entry insertion

@findex johnson-db-insert-entry
@findex johnson-db-insert-entries-batch
The function @code{johnson-db-insert-entry} inserts a single headword entry @*
into the database.  It takes the original HEADWORD text, a BYTE-OFFSET @*
(or character offset, depending on the format backend), and an @*
ENTRY-LENGTH specifying the entry's extent in the dictionary file.  The @*
headword is automatically normalized via @code{johnson-db-normalize} @*
(@ref{Headword normalization}) before insertion. @*

For bulk insertion during indexing, the function @*
@code{johnson-db-insert-entries-batch} inserts a list of entries in a single @*
database transaction, which is dramatically faster than individual @*
inserts for large dictionaries.  Each element in the ENTRIES list is a @*
@samp{(HEADWORD BYTE-OFFSET BYTE-LENGTH)} triple.  If an error occurs during @*
the transaction, it is rolled back and the error is re-signaled, leaving @*
the database in a consistent state. @*

@node Querying entries
@section Querying entries

@findex johnson-db-query-exact
@findex johnson-db-query-prefix
@findex johnson-db-entry-count
The function @code{johnson-db-query-exact} queries the database for entries @*
whose normalized headword exactly matches the normalized form of WORD@. @*
It returns a list of @samp{(HEADWORD BYTE-OFFSET BYTE-LENGTH)} triples, @*
where HEADWORD is the original non-normalized text.  Multiple triples @*
may be returned when a dictionary contains duplicate headwords (e.g., @*
from headword alternation) or when multiple entries share the same @*
normalized form.  This function is used during the lookup flow in @*
@code{johnson-lookup} (@ref{Looking up words}). @*

The function @code{johnson-db-query-prefix} queries the database for distinct @*
headwords whose normalized form begins with the normalized PREFIX@.  It @*
uses a SQL @samp{LIKE} query on the indexed @code{headword_normalized} column for @*
efficient prefix matching.  The optional LIMIT argument defaults to 100. @*
This function powers the dynamic completion table used by @*
@code{johnson-lookup}. @*

The function @code{johnson-db-entry-count} returns the total number of rows @*
in the entries table.  It is used for display in the dictionary list @*
buffer (@ref{Dictionary list}) and in indexing progress messages. @*

@node Staleness detection and reset
@section Staleness detection and reset

@findex johnson-db-stale-p
@findex johnson-db-reset
The function @code{johnson-db-stale-p} checks whether the index for a @*
dictionary file is stale or does not exist.  It compares the file @*
modification time stored in the database metadata (under the key @*
@samp{"mtime"}) against the actual file's modification time.  If the sqlite @*
database file does not exist at all, the function returns non-nil.  This @*
function is called during the indexing flow @*
(@ref{Indexing dictionaries}) to determine which @*
dictionaries need re-indexing. @*

The function @code{johnson-db-reset} deletes all entries from a database in @*
preparation for re-indexing.  It issues @samp{DELETE FROM entries} but does @*
not drop the table or remove metadata.  After a reset, the entry count @*
is zero and new entries can be inserted via @*
@code{johnson-db-insert-entries-batch} (@ref{Entry insertion}). @*

@node DSL format detection
@section DSL format detection

@findex johnson-dsl-detect
The function @code{johnson-dsl-detect} determines whether a given file path @*
is a DSL dictionary file.  It checks for the @samp{.dsl} extension @*
(case-insensitively) and then verifies that the first non-BOM content in @*
the file starts with @samp{#}, which indicates a DSL metadata header. @*

The detection handles all supported encodings: it reads the BOM to @*
determine the encoding, skips the appropriate number of BOM bytes, and @*
decodes the initial content to check for the @samp{#} character.  For UTF-16 @*
files, it reads enough bytes (64) to ensure it captures the first @*
decoded characters. @*

This function is registered as the @code{:detect} handler in the format @*
registry and is called during dictionary discovery to identify DSL files @*
among all files found in the configured directories. @*

@node DSL metadata parsing
@section DSL metadata parsing

@findex johnson-dsl-parse-metadata
The function @code{johnson-dsl-parse-metadata} extracts metadata headers from @*
a DSL dictionary file.  It reads only the first few kilobytes of the @*
file (4 KB for UTF-8, 8 KB for UTF-16) since headers always appear at @*
the top, making this operation efficient even for large files. @*

The function parses three header fields: @samp{#NAME} (the dictionary's @*
display name), @samp{#INDEX_LANGUAGE} (the source language), and @*
@samp{#CONTENTS_LANGUAGE} (the target language).  Header values are enclosed @*
in double quotes in the file. @*

It returns a plist with keys @code{:name}, @code{:source-lang}, and @*
@code{:target-lang}.  If a header is absent, the corresponding value defaults @*
to an empty string.  The core module uses these values for dictionary @*
display names and for auto-detecting language-pair groups @*
(@ref{Search scope and groups}). @*

@node DSL index building
@section DSL index building

@findex johnson-dsl-build-index
The function @code{johnson-dsl-build-index} parses an entire DSL dictionary @*
file and calls a CALLBACK function for each headword entry found.  The @*
callback receives three arguments: the headword string, the character @*
offset of the entry body in the decoded buffer (1-based), and the @*
character length of the body. @*

The parsing proceeds in a single pass through a decoded buffer cache. @*
It first skips metadata header lines (beginning with @samp{#}), then @*
identifies entries by their structure: flush-left lines are headwords, @*
and indented lines (beginning with a tab or spaces) are the entry body. @*
Multiple consecutive flush-left lines before an indented body are treated @*
as multiple headwords for the same entry. @*

Each raw headword is expanded via the internal headword expansion @*
pipeline, which handles three kinds of variants: @*

@itemize
@item
@strong{Split markers}: @samp{colour@{/@}color} produces two separate headwords, @*
@samp{colour} and @samp{color}. @*

@item
@strong{Alternation}: @samp{pre@{a/b@}suf} expands to @samp{preasuf} and @samp{prebsuf}. @*

@item
@strong{Optional parts}: @samp{go(es)} expands to both @samp{go} and @samp{goes}. @*
@end itemize

Escaped characters (@samp{\[}, @samp{\]}, @samp{\@{}, @samp{\@}}, @samp{\(}, @samp{\)}) are stripped @*
after expansion.  Each expanded variant becomes a separate row in the @*
database, all pointing to the same entry body. @*

If a headword fails to parse, it is skipped and a count of skipped @*
entries is logged as a warning message at the end of the indexing run. @*

A key design decision is the use of @emph{decoded buffers} rather than raw @*
byte access.  Dictionary files are opened with their detected encoding @*
(UTF-16LE, UTF-16BE, UTF-8 with BOM, or plain UTF-8) and cached as @*
multibyte Emacs buffers.  The index stores character positions rather @*
than byte offsets, which ensures that UTF-16 encoded files work correctly @*
for both indexing and retrieval. @*

@node DSL entry retrieval
@section DSL entry retrieval

@findex johnson-dsl-retrieve-entry
The function @code{johnson-dsl-retrieve-entry} retrieves the raw entry body @*
from a DSL dictionary file.  It takes the file path, a character offset @*
(CHAR-OFFSET, 1-based), and a character count (NCHARS), and returns the @*
corresponding substring from the decoded buffer cache. @*

Because the index stores character positions rather than byte offsets, @*
this function works correctly with all supported encodings, including @*
UTF-16 files where byte positions would not align with character @*
boundaries. @*

The decoded buffer cache keeps dictionary files open as hidden Emacs @*
buffers (named @samp{" *johnson-cache: PATH"}) for fast repeated lookups. @*
All cache buffers can be killed via @code{johnson-close-caches} @*
(@ref{Cache management}). @*

@node DSL entry rendering
@section DSL entry rendering

@findex johnson-dsl-render-entry
The function @code{johnson-dsl-render-entry} transforms raw DSL entry text @*
into richly formatted content in the current buffer.  It inserts the @*
rendered text at point using Emacs text properties and faces rather than @*
HTML or shr rendering. @*

The rendering proceeds in several steps.  First, leading indentation @*
(tab or spaces) is stripped from each line.  Media references @*
(@samp{@{@{...@}@}}) are removed.  Then the text is inserted into the buffer and @*
processed in two passes. @*

The first pass handles @samp{<<...>>} cross-reference markers, converting @*
them into clickable buttons with @code{johnson-ref-face} @*
(@ref{Link faces}).  Each button invokes @code{johnson-lookup} for the @*
referenced word when activated. @*

The second pass processes DSL tags using a stack-based parser.  The @*
parser scans for tag patterns matching @samp{[tag]} and @samp{[/tag]}, maintaining @*
a stack of active tags.  When a closing tag is encountered, the @*
corresponding face or text property is applied to the enclosed region. @*
The supported tags include: @*

@itemize
@item
@samp{[b]}, @samp{[i]}, @samp{[u]}: text styling (@ref{Text styling faces}) @*
@item
@samp{[c]} and @samp{[c NAME]}: color (@ref{Color faces}) @*
@item
@samp{[sup]}, @samp{[sub]}: superscript and subscript via @code{display} properties @*
@item
@samp{[ex]}: examples (@ref{Content type faces}) @*
@item
@samp{[*]}: optional/secondary text @*
@item
@samp{[ref]}: cross-reference buttons (@ref{Link faces}) @*
@item
@samp{[url]}: external URL buttons @*
@item
@samp{[lang id=N]}: language identifier (stored as text property) @*
@item
@samp{[trn]}, @samp{[!trn]}: translation blocks (blank line separation) @*
@item
@samp{[com]}: comments @*
@item
@samp{[m]} and @samp{[m0]}-@samp{[m9]}: indentation levels via @code{line-prefix} and @*
@code{wrap-prefix} display properties @*
@item
@samp{[p]}: abbreviation markers (rendered as-is) @*
@item
@samp{[']}: stress marks (@ref{Text styling faces}) @*
@item
@samp{[s]}: media references (content is suppressed) @*
@end itemize

@node Faces
@chapter Faces

All faces defined in @samp{johnson-dsl.el} belong to the @code{johnson-dsl-faces} @*
customization group.  You can customize them via @samp{M-x customize-group
RET johnson-dsl-faces RET} to match your preferred color theme.  The @*
face @code{johnson-section-header-face} is defined in @samp{johnson.el} and @*
belongs to the @code{johnson} group. @*

@menu
* Text styling faces::
* Content type faces::
* Link faces::
* Section header face::
* Color faces::
@end menu

@node Text styling faces
@section Text styling faces

@vindex johnson-bold-face
@vindex johnson-italic-face
@vindex johnson-underline-face
@vindex johnson-stress-face
The face @code{johnson-bold-face} renders text enclosed in @samp{[b]...[/b]} tags. @*
It inherits from @code{bold}. @*

The face @code{johnson-italic-face} renders text enclosed in @samp{[i]...[/i]} @*
tags.  It inherits from @code{italic}. @*

The face @code{johnson-underline-face} renders text enclosed in @*
@samp{[u]...[/u]} tags.  It sets the @samp{:underline} attribute to @code{t}. @*

The face @code{johnson-stress-face} renders stress marks enclosed in @*
@samp{[']}@dots{}=[/']=  tags.  It inherits from @code{bold}, making accented @*
syllables visually prominent in pronunciation guides. @*

@node Content type faces
@section Content type faces

@vindex johnson-example-face
@vindex johnson-optional-face
@vindex johnson-comment-face
The face @code{johnson-example-face} renders example sentences enclosed in @*
@samp{[ex]...[/ex]} tags.  It inherits from @code{italic} with a @samp{dim gray} @*
foreground, visually distinguishing examples from definitions. @*

The face @code{johnson-optional-face} renders optional or secondary text @*
enclosed in @samp{[*]...[/*]} tags.  It uses a muted gray foreground that @*
adapts to the background: @samp{gray50} on light backgrounds and @samp{gray60} @*
on dark backgrounds. @*

The face @code{johnson-comment-face} renders comment annotations enclosed in @*
@samp{[com]...[/com]} tags.  It inherits from @code{font-lock-comment-face}, @*
giving comments a consistent appearance with the rest of Emacs. @*

@node Link faces
@section Link faces

@vindex johnson-ref-face
@vindex johnson-url-face
The face @code{johnson-ref-face} renders cross-reference links enclosed in @*
@samp{[ref]...[/ref]} tags or @samp{<<...>>} markers.  It inherits from @code{link}. @*
Cross-references are rendered as clickable buttons that invoke @*
@code{johnson-lookup} for the referenced word @*
(@ref{Following cross-references}). @*

The face @code{johnson-url-face} renders external URL links enclosed in @*
@samp{[url]...[/url]} tags.  It inherits from @code{link}.  URL links are rendered @*
as clickable buttons that open the URL via @code{browse-url}. @*

@node Section header face
@section Section header face

@vindex johnson-section-header-face
The face @code{johnson-section-header-face} renders dictionary section @*
headers in the results buffer (the lines using Unicode box-drawing @*
character @samp{━}).  It inherits from @code{bold} with the @samp{:extend} attribute @*
set to @code{t}, ensuring the face extends to the edge of the window. @*

This face is defined in @samp{johnson.el} (for the results buffer headers) @*
and also in @samp{johnson-dsl.el} (for DSL-specific section headers). @*

@node Color faces
@section Color faces

@vindex johnson-color-default-face
@vindex johnson-color-green-face
@vindex johnson-color-red-face
@vindex johnson-color-blue-face
@vindex johnson-color-gray-face
@vindex johnson-color-brown-face
@vindex johnson-color-violet-face
@vindex johnson-color-orange-face
DSL dictionaries use @samp{[c]...[/c]} and @samp{[c NAME]...[/c]} tags to apply @*
color to text.  The module maps DSL color names (case-insensitively) to @*
a fixed set of customizable Emacs faces.  All color faces define @*
separate foreground colors for light and dark backgrounds. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-default-face} is used when no color name is @*
specified (i.e., a bare @samp{[c]} tag).  It defaults to green (@samp{dark green} @*
on light backgrounds, @samp{green3} on dark backgrounds). @*

The face @code{johnson-color-green-face} is used for the DSL color names @*
@samp{green} and @samp{darkgreen}. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-red-face} is used for @samp{red}, @samp{darkred}, and @*
@samp{crimson}. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-blue-face} is used for @samp{blue}, @samp{darkblue}, and @*
@samp{steelblue}. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-gray-face} is used for @samp{gray}, @samp{darkgray}, and @*
@samp{dimgray}. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-brown-face} is used for @samp{brown} and @*
@samp{saddlebrown}. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-violet-face} is used for @samp{violet}, @samp{purple}, @*
and @samp{darkviolet}. @*

The face @code{johnson-color-orange-face} is used for @samp{orange} and @*
@samp{darkorange}. @*

Any unrecognized color name falls back to @code{johnson-color-default-face}. @*

@node Indices
@chapter Indices

@menu
* Function index::
* Variable index::
@end menu

@node Function index
@section Function index

@printindex fn

@node Variable index
@section Variable index

@printindex vr

@bye
